<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
<title>part0001</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css" />
</head>
<body id="page_2">
<div class="class-18">Study Less, Study Smart</div>
<div class="class-16">A guide to effective study techniques and enhanced learning.</div>
<div class="class-25">By</div>
<div class="class-36">Marty Lobdel<span id="page_3"></span>
l</div>
<div class="class-22">Table of Contents</div>
<div class="class-31">
<span class="class-24">Page</span>
</div>
<div class="class-2">Introduction                                                                5</div>
<div class="class-2">How long can you study effectively?              7</div>
<div class="class-2">Reinforce your study habits.                                          9</div>
<div class="class-2">Create or use a study area                                          11</div>
<div class="class-2">Learning mindfulness                                                        13</div>
<div class="class-2">Discovering the meaning                                           15</div>
<div class="class-2">Deeper Processing                                                                      17</div>
<div class="class-2">Mnemonics                                                                                    19</div>
<div class="class-2">SQ4R                                                                                                  23</div>
<div class="class-2">Note taking                                                                                    25</div>
<div class="class-2">Underlining, may hurt your efforts               27</div>
<div class="class-20">Regular Attendance                                                        2<span id="page_4"></span>
9</div>
<div class="class-34">Study group                                                                                    31</div>
<div class="class-2">Get enough sleep                                                                      33</div>
<div class="class-14">Conclusion                                                                                    3<span id="page_5"></span>
5</div>
<div id="srl_created_by_stampler" class="class-26">I<span id="toc0_Introduction"></span>
ntroduction</div>
<div class="class-0">I taught college success at Pierce College for nearly 20 of my 40 years at the college. I often opened the quarter by asking students, “How do you go about learning something?”  They usually answered that they would read it over, and over, and over until they memorized it.</div>
<div class="class-0">This taught me something: most students don’t know how to effectively learn school material. This is not their fault; most students have not been taught how to study. They have most likely been told to read it until they know it. They have also been told to spend more time studying and they will be an effective learner. “Seat time” is important for learning, but seat time that is not effective is a frustrating waste of time.</div>
<div class="class-0">I also realized that students confused memorization with grasping or understanding what they studied. This was not surprising since much of elementary school involved rote memorization rather than understanding concepts.</div>
<div class="class-0">The following strategies are research based rather than someone’s opinion or belief. I have received a large number of responses from students who have applied my suggestions and found they work. As I always said in class, I don’t expect you to do everything I suggest; but, try a couple of strategies and when they work add to them.</div>
<div class="class-23">Becoming an effective learner is an acquired skill. As with any skill, being a strong student takes coaching and practice. Trust me; you can learn to be a more effective student. The strategies in this book are meant for students from junior high to post-doctorate. The <span id="page_6"></span>
information is also highly relevant for learning material for one’s career<span id="page_7"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-28">H<span id="toc1_How_long_can_you_study_effectively_"></span>
ow long can you study effectively?</div>
<div class="class-0">At the outset of my study skills lecture, I asked the students how long could they study effectively. The shortest time mentioned was five minutes, but the average matched what researchers have found. Most students lose concentration after 20 to 30 minutes of studying. I did have a man, who was visiting my classroom; say he could study for six hours with solid concentration. After class, I learned that he was finishing medical school. Clearly he had developed his study skills to a high level.</div>
<div class="class-7">Even though most students can only study efficiently for about 20 to 30 minutes, many students push on for hours with little learning taking place. At this point, students learn to hate studying<span id="page_9"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-6">R<span id="toc2_Reinforce_your_study_behavior"></span>
einforce your study behavior</div>
<div class="class-0">
<span class="class-1">My first rule</span>
: when you feel that you are not learning efficiently<span class="class-3">, take a break and reinforce your prior studying behavior</span>
. To continue trying to study, if you are not learning efficiently, actually punishes your attempt to study. You feel bored, listless and discouraged which makes you less likely to want to study in the future.</div>
<div class="class-0">Here are some suggested reinforcements. You could: take a five minute break and enjoy some coffee, soft drink; call or text a friend; do some calisthenics; listen to a favorite piece of music; have a snack.</div>
<div class="class-0">The point is to do something that you like and tell yourself that it is a treat for studying well. It is interesting that a five minute break will allow you to come back and study efficiently for another 20 or 30 minutes. It will then be time for another break and more reinforcement.</div>
<div class="class-0">At the end of your study time, plan a bigger reinforcement, for example, watching a favorite program, going out for pizza, or taking a long shower. You make a treat for yourself and gradually studying becomes more enjoyable and productive.</div>
<div class="class-8">You should also look for short opportunities to study. For example, if there is a dead time between classes, use it to study. The same goes for work breaks if you are employed, or time commuting on bus or rail. There are often several times during the day that you can spend a few minutes studying.<span id="page_11"></span>
</div>
<div class="class-10">U<span id="toc3_Use_or_create_a_study__library"></span>
se or create a study/library</div>
<div class="class-0">Few of my students lived in homes with a study or library. There are school and public libraries, but they are sometimes inconvenient to access. <span class="class-1">So, I propose rule number 2</span>
: create a study.</div>
<div class="class-0">Why is this important? Many students try to study in places that are meant for other purposes. My students often studied in their bedrooms, sometime at a desk, sometimes in bed. The problems here, the student often finds taking a nap or going to bed over-rides studying. A second popular study spot is the kitchen table or bar. As you may have guessed, thoughts of eating or snacking often over-ride concentration. The third study spot is the den or living room. If the TV, or stereo is on, studying is unlikely to be effective.</div>
<div class="class-0">Creating a study is fairly simple. Get a table lamp and attach a small sign that says, “Study lamp.” If you study at a desk in your room, use the lamp only while you are studying effectively. Do not use it for any other purpose or while taking a break. Studying in bed is a bad idea. The desire to sleep is too strong. If you study at the kitchen table or bar, remove all food related items and use your study lamp. If no one else is in the living room and all entertainment is off, use your study lamp. I have had numerous students tell me they need music to study by. If the music is truly background, then okay. But if you are singing to the tune or tapping your feet, or imagining the artist, then you are not fully concentrating on your studies and you need to turn the music off. No matter where you study, turn your cell phone off. Keep in mind you are doing focused studying and do not want interruptions<span id="page_12"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-0">When you get to a point where you need to take a break, turn the study lamp off and reinforce your good studying behavior.  When you’re ready to study again, turn the lamp back on. After a while, the study lamp becomes a cue to get focused on the material you’re studying. Gradually, you should find that the length of time that you can remain focused will also increase. I have had some students say that they have come to like studying as a result of this technique.</div>
<div class="class-19">If you have access to a library, use it. Libraries are designed to facilitate concentrated reading/studying. If the activities of others in the library cause you to lose concentration, find a study carrel that creates your own quiet space. Once again, you should take breaks and reinforce your studying<span id="page_14"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-21">M<span id="toc4_Mindfulness"></span>
indfulness</div>
<div class="class-0">Have you ever noticed when you check the time and then someone asks what time is, and you say you don’t know? The reason is simple; you were not trying to remember what time it was, you were only checking the time. Or have you noticed how few items you can recall after reading a newspaper or watching the news? Material that is remembered, when you are not trying to learn it, is called “incidental learning.” Incidental learning is inconsistent and meager compared to intentional learning.</div>
<div class="class-12">
<span class="class-1">Rule number 3</span>
: you remember or learn best when you <span class="class-3">intend</span>
 to learn the material. Intending to learn is a form of mindfulness. Every class you attend, every note you take, every text you read should be times where you think, “I intend to learn this material.” Exactly what changes at the brain level is unclear, but such mindfulness will impact your learning effectivity<span id="page_15"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-9">D<span id="toc5_Discover_the_meaning"></span>
iscover the meaning</div>
<div class="class-0">I often asked my students, what does “meaning” mean? The word “meaning” is not easily defined by most students. I think the best way to conceptualize “meaningful” is to say that things are meaningful when they relate to something you already understand.</div>
<div class="class-30">I would then do the following demonstration. I read the following letters, and asked them to try to remember all letters in sequence: H-W-A-E-D-P-N-P-E-S-Y-D-Y-A. Most students could not correctly recall letters beyond “P” or “N”. I then rearranged the 14 letters and read: H-A-P-P-Y-W-E-D-N-E-S-D-A-Y, and most students could repeat the letters in sequence. Clearly, once there is meaning to the letters, they were easy to remember. <span class="class-1">Rule number 4</span>
: trying to learn any material that is meaningless is a very difficult to task.  The next section will suggest ways to find meaning in your lessons<span id="page_17"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-17">D<span id="toc6_Deeper_processing"></span>
eeper processing</div>
<div class="class-0">I then did a second demonstration.  I divided the class into two halves. I told them I would be reading a series of words. One-half of the students were asked to write their estimate of how many vowels were in each word, the other half were asked to estimate, using a 1 to 5 scale, how useful the item would be on a deserted island. I read each word slowly, so they could write their estimates. After reading the list, I paused for 30 seconds, while they wrote their name and address; I did this to dump short-term memory. I then asked them to write as many words from my list as they could recall. The demonstration never failed. The students estimating vowels got about 5 or 6 words while the students thinking about the usefulness averaged 10 or 11 words. Twice the recall for one group, with no more time or effort expended.</div>
<div class="class-0">Each side heard the words in the same tone, at the same pace and yet one side typically recalled twice the number of words, and they were not even trying to remember them (yes, thinking about the usefulness of an object even improved incidental learning). The above difference in performance is due to “deep” versus “surface” processing. If you think of the words in terms of the number of vowels, letters, etc., then you are surface processing. When you think of the meaning of the word and its usefulness, you are using deeper processing.</div>
<div class="class-0">So, how do the above translate into studying more effectively? <span class="class-1">Rule</span>
 <span class="class-1">number 5</span>
: discover the meaning of what you are studying. <span class="class-1">Rule number 6</span>
: always engage in deeper processing.</div>
<div class="class-0">Yes, this is where students must think. Teachers and textbook writers typically try to make material meaningful, but even the best lecture or text may not resonate with students. This is where you have to think how this new material relates to things that you already know and <span id="page_18"></span>
understand. If you fail to see connections, ask classmates how they came to understand the material. Many schools have tutoring centers staffed by people who can help you make sense of what you’re studying. You can also go to your teacher and ask for more clarification. Faculty usually appreciates students who ask follow-up questions, for example, “that was a great lecture, Professor Plum, but I’m still unclear about….”</div>
<div class="class-0">I know that some students simply memorize the material, but this will not serve them well in the long run. Subsequent courses often require that you understand basic concepts before you enroll. Few things are more frustrating than failing a class because you didn’t understand the prerequisite concepts, and yet passed a prerequisite course. I know one student who completed high school calculus by memorizing the material, but not understanding it. Unfortunately, when he tested for university entrance, he was required to take calculus again. He was not a happy camper.</div>
<div class="class-0">With regard to deeper processing, try to think how to apply or use the new concept. Ask yourself, when or where would the concept have value? Or, have you seen the application of similar concepts? The more you think about the deeper implications of the material; the more likely it will make sense, and you will remember it.</div>
<div class="class-5">There is another bonus: the more you understand, the easier it is to learn new material. You will also come to see that virtually everything you learn connects with other things you already know. Chemistry connects with biology, which connects with psychology, which connects with history, which connects with literature, and so on. You are now on your way to being educated rather than merely trained<span id="page_19"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-27">M<span id="toc7_Mnemonics"></span>
nemonics</div>
<div class="class-0">It is always best to try to understand concepts, but some lessons involve facts. While concepts are categories, principles, definitions, and relationships, facts typically are names, dates, and numbers. For example, “atomic number” is a concept while the “atomic number of oxygen” is a fact (number 8, for you non-chemistry types). Most students when faced with factual material turn to rote memorization, for example, repetition, flash cards, or quizzing one another. Yes, you can learn by rote. In fact, most of us learned our multiplication tables by rote drills. However, rote learning usually takes a lot of time, effort and can easily become confused at the critical point of recall. <span class="class-1">Therefore, rule number 7</span>
: try to use a mnemonic device to memorize facts.</div>
<div class="class-0">What are mnemonics? Mnemonics devices are gimmicks that facilitate the memorization of facts. There are three main types of mnemonic devices that I find useful for academic learning: acronyms (coined words); acrostics (coined phrases) and interacting images.</div>
<div class="class-0">
<span class="class-1">Acronyms</span>
 (coined words)</div>
<div class="class-0">Most are familiar with acronyms such as scuba (Self-Contained, Underwater, Breathing, Apparatus) or NATO (North Atlantic, Treaty, Organization). Acronyms allow one to pack a lot of information into a small, easily remembered package. How does this work for school material?</div>
<div class="class-0">I had a student who was so frustrated that he could not remember the ordering of multiplication for the following type of problem: 2x+6y X 4x+ 7y. The student never learned the acronym FOIL (First, Outer, <span id="page_20"></span>
Inner, Last). I had another student who had trouble remembering if it was the left or right atrium of the heart that had oxygenated blood. We came up with the acronym: RADEO (Right Atrium is DEOxynated, I know radio is spelled differently, but that doesn’t matter). Once she had this, it was obvious that the left atrium is oxygenated.</div>
<div class="class-0">The Great Lakes are HOMES (Huron, Ontario, Michigan, Erie and Superior).  The spectral colors are ROY G. BIV (Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, and Violet). My students often had trouble with remembering if sensory neurons were afferent or efferent neurons. I pointed out that they are the SAME (Sensory Afferent; Motor Efferent). Creating an acronym can save a lot of time, but if you can’t find a clever acronym, you might try for an acrostic.</div>
<div class="class-33">Acrostics (coined phrases)</div>
<div class="class-0">Most of us remember: In fourteen-hundred and ninety-two, Columbus sailed the ocean blue; or, thirty days hath September, April, June and November…. These phrases help us remember facts that could easily be lost or confused.</div>
<div class="class-0">I still remember my son trying to tighten a bolt but not sure which way to turn it. I said turn it “clock-wise”, but in the digital age this had little meaning. I demonstrated the correct rotation, and he said, “Oh, you mean: righty tighty, lefty loosey.” Yes, that is what I meant.</div>
<div class="class-0">So, how can you apply acrostics to academics? Let’s say you need to know the biological taxonomy: kingdom; phylum, class; order; family; genus; and species. You could make up a phrase such as: Kings Play Chess on Friday with Great Spirit. If you needed to know our solar system’s planets in order: My Very Eager Mother Just Served Us Nine Pizzas (notice, I still count Pluto as a planet…oh well, I’m old)<span id="page_21"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-0">You can remember that “stalactites” “<span class="class-3">hang</span>
 tight.” Or, Every Good Boy Deserves Fudge. Or, Whales And Jellied Marmalade, Moonpies and Jam… (Washington, Adams, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, Adams, Jackson…), gives us the presidents of the United States in order. Or, I before E, except after C, except in words like neighbor. Or, when two vowels go walking, the first one does the talking (in most instances, but not all). Many facts can be readily recalled when transformed into a saying.</div>
<div class="class-5">I have been told that anatomy teachers sometime help students remember the twelve cranial nerves in order, top down, with the saying: On Old Olympus Towering Top, A Finn And German Viewed And Hopped. Translated: Olfactory; Optic; Oculomotor; Trochlea; Trigeminal; etc. There is another saying (ooh, ooh, ooh, to touch and feel….) about touching and feeling a certain female body part. This is a risqué acrostic that only the bravest female instructors would ever share with students. However, this raises a good point: sometimes the best mnemonic is a little weird or naughty, making it easier to recall. Just be careful who you share it with.</div>
<div class="class-15">Interacting Images</div>
<div class="class-0">My favorite type of mnemonic is the interacting image. In this mnemonic you pair the fact you are attempting to remember with an image that guarantees the correct recall.</div>
<div class="class-0">I had a student who was frustrated in a nutrition class. She grasped the major concepts but had trouble with the facts on tests. She reported that she struggled with remembering how many calories per gram were in the three major food groups. We looked them up: carbohydrates 4c/gm; proteins 4c/gm; and fats 9c/gm. I suggested she think about her car which has four wheels; therefore, <span class="class-3">car</span>
bohydrates <span id="page_22"></span>
have 4c/gm. A pro-car would have four wheels; therefore <span class="class-3">pro</span>
tein would have 4c/gm. I then asked her about cats. How many lives do cats have: nine? So a <span class="class-3">fat cat</span>
 would have 9c/gm. Later, someone asked me about alcohol which has 7c/gm. This was easy, seven letters in the word “alcohol”, or a favorite call drink: Seagram’s Seven with Seven-Up (sevens everywhere).</div>
<div class="class-0">I had trouble remembering whether infradian cycles were longer than a day, or were ultradian cycles longer than a day. Then I recalled an old advertisement:” Now beautiful hair in 45 minutes with Ultress.” Ultradian is similar to the word Ultress, so a short period of time is associated. Therefore, ultradian cycles, for example REM cycles, are shorter than a day and infradian cycles are longer than a day.</div>
<div class="class-35">Interacting images can allow you to link many important facts with an image that guarantees the correct recall. There are other mnemonic techniques, such as, peg-word and method of loci.  I never found them having great academic use, but you may. You can learn much more about mnemonics with a quick web search for sites or books on the subject<span id="page_23"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-29">S<span id="toc8_SQ4R"></span>
Q4R</div>
<div class="class-0">In the 1960’s, SQ3R was popular. It has re-emerged as SQ4R, and yet, many students have never heard of it. So what does SQ4R stand for? When you are about to read learning material, you should first, <span class="class-1">Survey</span>
, then <span class="class-1">Question</span>
, then <span class="class-1">Read, Record, Recite, Review</span>
. <span class="class-1">Rule</span>
 <span class="class-1">number 8:</span>
 always SQ4R your study material.</div>
<div class="class-0">
<span class="class-1">Survey</span>
 Simply glance through the entire article, chapter or whatever you are about to read. Read snippets from the material, notice headings, pictures, graphs, summaries, etc.</div>
<div class="class-0">
<span class="class-1">Question</span>
 As you survey, think of questions that you will attempt to answer when you read the entire material. We learn better when we are looking for answers. An interesting example I used in class, is that few people have seen the arrow pointing to the right in the words, “FedEx.” The arrow is formed by the junction of the “E” and the ”x”. The next time you see a FedEx logo look for the arrow. Once you see it, the arrow will jump out at you every time you see FedEx (Hint: the arrow is bright white). But if you hadn’t looked for it, it is unlikely that you would have seen it. Looking for answers, changes the way we process reading material and facilitates learning.</div>
<div class="class-0">
<span class="class-1">Read, Record, Recite, Review.</span>
 As you read, take notes in the margins of the page or on a separate sheet of paper. Such notes are powerful learning tools and especially useful when you review. Take time to recite what you read and took notes on. The more active you are while learning, the better. Passively reading the material is often slow and inefficient. And finally, review what you read. This is especially easy if you have made notes. Be certain that you can recall the key <span id="page_24"></span>
points and not just recognize having read them (See the Underlying/highlighting section for more information on this).</div>
<div class="class-11">When you do SQ4R, you will greatly increase the retention of material read for class. Yes, it takes a little more time but the dividends are worth it. <span class="class-1">So, remember rule number 9</span>
: always SQ4R<span id="page_25"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-4">N<span id="toc9_Note_Taking"></span>
ote Taking</div>
<div class="class-0">Many students do a poor job of note taking. Some take no notes at all, claiming they are auditory learners. Such students usually fail the first exam and then fade from the classroom. No one can learn and recall everything they hear in a lecture/presentation. Some students attempt to write everything the presenter says. Most students who try to capture every word cannot keep up and are often frustrated with fragmented notes. They also typically miss the main points of the presentation. So what should a student do?</div>
<div class="class-0">
<span class="class-1">Rule number 8</span>
: Competent note takers write only the key points, facts, definitions, or concepts. A good way to get started is to draw a vertical line down the center of your note paper. Briefly jot the main elements of the presentation on the left side of each page.</div>
<div class="class-0">
<span class="class-1">Rule number 9</span>
: Elaborate on your notes as soon as possible. Ideally, right after the class ends, take a few minutes to elaborate on each of the main points, using the other side of each page. Cite details, examples, and/or applications for each major point. If you wait for a few hours to elaborate your notes, some of the main points may no longer make sense. If you need help on the meaning of a main point, ask a classmate or find the teacher. Students, who are trying to learn what is taught, are not viewed negatively by teachers, we like you.</div>
<div class="class-8">Good note taking helps you stay focused (possibly, awake), and it is active learning that encourages deeper processing. Good notes facilitate learning and are extremely useful when it comes time to review your learning. <span id="page_27"></span>
</div>
<div class="class-10">U<span id="toc10_Underlining__highlighting_may_hurt_your_efforts"></span>
nderlining/highlighting may hurt your efforts</div>
<div class="class-0">Over my 40 years of teaching, I heard countless students tell me, after doing poorly on an exam, that they knew everything last night, but forgot it over-night. I often tried to explain that if they learned it last night, unless they had a stroke or other neurologic trauma, they would not have forgotten. I would go on to explain that students confuse <span class="class-3">recognition</span>
 with <span class="class-3">knowing</span>
.</div>
<div class="class-0">Humans have an incredible capacity to see something and then recognize it at a later time. Unfortunately, when it comes to learning material, recognition is not going to help, unless a student is taking a fairly easy multiple-choice exam.</div>
<div class="class-0">So how does underlining sometimes hurt a student? Students who underline in their text, usually do a quick read where thy underline the most important elements in the reading. Then, students typically go back and reread what they have underlined. When they reread the first underlined section, they mistakenly believe they know that information when, in fact, they only recognize having read it. The real test is: can they wait a moment and then recall the information without looking at it. Unfortunately, they now have the belief they have learned it; <span class="class-3">when they have actually not learned the most important parts of their reading.</span>
</div>
<div class="class-11">
<span class="class-1">Rule number 10</span>
: Be certain that you can actually recall what you have underlined, and you are not simply recognizing it. Underling can be <span id="page_28"></span>
useful tool when correctly applied. It is even better to take notes in the margin of you reading. Putting a concept in your own words involves an active, deeper processing approach, which facilitates learning. Moreover, your own words are generally easier to recall than the author’s words. Just be sure you have accurately captured the meaning of the material<span id="page_30"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-4">R<span id="toc11_Regular_attendance"></span>
egular attendance</div>
<div class="class-13">Numerous studies have demonstrated that students who attend regularly earn higher grades. I know that lectures can be boring (not mine, of course), but you never know when something may happen in class that has a deep impact on your life. Attending class is also requisite practice for your career. Woody Allen once claimed that, “80% of success is just showing up.” Employers claim that many employees show up to work if and when they feel like it. Most workers with such an attitude do not last long. <span class="class-1">So, rule number 11</span>
: Attend class regularly, you’ll learn more and it is good practice for the world of work<span id="page_31"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-32">S<span id="toc12_Study_groups"></span>
tudy groups</div>
<div class="class-0">Students who enroll in difficult classes quickly learn the value of study groups. Study groups encourage active learning. Students in study groups can share ways, in which, they made sense of new concepts (see, Discover the Meaning section above). Study groups also allow students to divide large amounts of material into more manageable portions. Each student can then take a portion of the material, learn it and then share with the group.</div>
<div class="class-12">I always encouraged “study buddies” in my courses. Students who picked-up on the idea performed better on exams and papers<span class="class-1">. I encourage rule number 12</span>
: whenever possible, form study groups. Be sure that your study group does not evolve into mere socializing. Stay on task and you will see improvement in your learning<span id="page_33"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-9">G<span id="toc13_Get_enough_sleep"></span>
et enough sleep</div>
<div class="class-0">What we learn during the day becomes consolidated during our sleep. A large number of students have difficulty learning because they are sleep deprived. If you study and don’t get adequate sleep, much of your study time is wasted. Pulling “all nighters” before a big exam may allow you to pass the test, but the amount learned is usually minimal.</div>
<div class="class-7">It is often difficult to find the time to get adequate sleep. I encouraged my students to record the amount of time they spent each day doing various activities. Most students quickly realized that there were, in fact, many wasted hours. <span class="class-1">Rule number 13:</span>
 arrange your life so that you get adequate sleep. Sleep deprivation not only impacts learning it also makes you more likely to fall asleep while driving<span id="page_35"></span>
.</div>
<div class="class-6">C<span id="toc14_Conclusion"></span>
onclusion</div>
<div class="class-0">I know the above suggestions will allow you to study less and yet learn more. I did not go into strategies for test taking. Most of the books/presentations that cover “test taking” emphasize passing exams rather than learning the material. I believe that many students already have the mistaken notion that all they need to do is pass the course. If they pass the course, but didn’t learn the material, then it was a waste of time, money and energy. Therefore, I have emphasized how to <span class="class-3">learn</span>
 more efficiently rather than how to pass exams.</div>
<div class="class-0">I hope you enjoyed the material and you will try some of these strategies in your future studies. I also would appreciate your sharing the above information with you friends, relatives and colleagues. Giving knowledge to others is a wonderful gift.</div>
<div class="class-0">Sincerely,</div>
<div class="class-0">Marty Lobdel<span id="page_36"></span>
l</div>
</body>
</html>
